  on either side. This restriction allows us to simplify our expression for γ:

                                                                                                        (5.12)




 Comment 5.1 – Constrained optimisation with Lagrange multipliers: At various points in this book
 we will need to perform constrained optimisations – finding the values of a set of parameters that
 maximise (or minimise) an objective function but that also satisfy some constraints. This can be done
 using Lagrange multipliers. In particular, we make a new objective function which includes the original
 plus an additional term for each constraint. The form of these terms is chosen such that the optimum of
 the new function is equal to the optimum of the constrained problem.

 For example, suppose we wish to minimise f(w) subject to the constraint g(w) ≤ a:




 The new objective function is produced by adding a Lagrangian term of the form λ(a − g(w)) and
 optimised over both w and the Lagrange multiplier λ:




 We are not going to go into the details of how this works here. Whenever we perform constrained
 optimisation, we will state the necessary Lagrangian terms without any further details. For more
 details, see the suggested reading at the end of this chapter.

To maximise the margin, we must therefore maximize            . There are, however, some constraints. Recall

that we decided that, for the closest points in class 1: wTxn + b = 1. Therefore, w has to be chosen to
satisfy wTxn + b ≥ 1 for all points in class 1. Similarly, it must satisfy wTxn + b ≤ −1 for those in class −1.
Defining the labels as as±1 allows us to express these two sets of constraints succinctly as




Therefore, our learning task is to find the largest value of               that satisfies these N constraints

(where N is the number of points in the training set). It will actually be easier to minimise          and so
we shall do this instead. Formally, our optimisation problem has become




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
  This is the first time we have come across a constrained optimisation problem. To solve it, we need to
incorporate the constraints into the objective function through a set of Lagrange multipliers. Lagrange
multipliers add a new term in our objective function for each constraint such that the optimum of the
new objective function corresponds to the optimum of the original, constrained problem. In our case, we
need N Lagrangian terms. Each has an associated Lagrange multiplier, which is itself constrained to be
positive. Without going into any more details of Lagrange multipliers, our new objective function is




where we’ve used the fact that ||w||2 = wTw. At an optimum of this new objective function, the partial
derivatives of the objective function with respect to w and b must be zero. These derivatives are




Equating these two expression to zero gives us the following two identities that must be satisfied at the
optimum:

                                                                                                      (5.13)




                                                                                                      (5.14)



Substituting the first of these identities back into the objective function gives us a new objective function
which must be maximised with respect to the αn rather than




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
where we used the fact that                         to remove the third term in the penultimate line. This
expression is known as the dual optimisation problem and has to be maximised subject to the following
constraints:




the second of which comes from Equation 5.14. Notice that w doesn’t feature at all in this optimisation
problem.
  This optimisation problem is a constrained quadratic programming task, quadratic because of the
αmαn term. There is no analytical solution, but it is reasonably straightforward to solve numerically. For
example, the MATLAB function quadprog solves problems such as these.


5.3.2.3 Making predictions
Given a set of optimal αn, how do we go about making predictions? Our decision function, tnew =
sign(wTxnew + b), is based on w and b, not αn. To convert it into a function of αn, we substitute the
expression for w given in Equation 5.13, resulting in

                                                                                                        (5.15)




To find b, we will use the fact that, for the closest points, tn(wTxn + b) = 1. Substituting Equation 5.13 into
this expression and rearranging allows us to calculate b (note that 1/tn = tn):

                                                                                                        (5.16)



where xn is any one of the closest points. This gives us everything we need to be able to classify any xnew.


5.3.2.4 Support vectors




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
The set of points closest to the maximum margin decision boundary are known collectively as the
support vectors. The name comes from the fact that they define, or support, the decision boundary. As
the decision boundary is found by maximising the margin and as the margin only depends on the closest
points, we could discard all of the other data and end up with just the same decision boundary. This is
reflected by the fact that, at the optimum, all of the αn that do not correspond to support vectors will be
zero. If they were non-zero, they would have an influence on the decision function (see Equation 5.15). In
many applications, this will lead to a sparse solution – the decision is a function of only a small subset of
the training examples. For large problems, this can be a very useful feature. Consider classifying a test
point using KNN when the training set consists of several thousand objects. To find the set of
neighbours, distances must be computed between the new object and all of the training objects. For an
SVM trained on the same data, the decision function might just involve a small subset of the training
data.




FIGURE 5.14 Decision boundary and support vectors for a linear SVM.

  Figure 5.14 shows a binary dataset and the resulting decision boundary (wTx + b = 0, where
                       ) along with the three support vectors (large grey circles) (MATLAB script:
svmhard.m). These are the only points for which αn > 0 and hence the only points that need to be used

when classifying new data.
   Although it could be considered efficient to base our decision on (in this case) only three of the training
points, it will not always be a good thing. To illustrate why, consider Figure 5.15 (MATLAB script:
svmhard.m). This is the same data that we saw in Figure 5.14 with one difference – the support vector from
the class denoted by grey squares has been moved closer to the other class. Moving this single data
point has had a large effect on the position of the decision boundary. This is another example of over-
fitting – we are allowing the data to have too much influence. To see why this happens, we need to look
at our original constraints:

                                                                                                       (5.17)

This means that all training points have to sit on the correct side of the decision boundary. This type of
SVM is known as a hard margin SVM. It will sometimes be sensible (and lead to better generalisation
performance) to relax this constraint. Fortunately, this is straightforward using a soft margin.




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.15 Decision boundary and support vectors for a linear SVM. The support vector from the grey
square class appears to be exerting too much influence.


5.3.2.5 Soft margins
To allow points to potentially lie on the wrong side of the boundary, we need to slacken the constraints in
our original formulation. In particular, we need to adapt Equation 5.17 so that it admits the possibility of
some points lying closer to (or on the wrong side of) the decision boundary. To achieve this, the
constraint becomes

                                                                                                     (5.18)

where ξn ≥ 0. If 0 ≤ ξn ≤ 1, the point lies on the correct side of the boundary but within the boundary of
the margin. If ξn > 1, the point lies on the wrong side of the boundary. Our optimisation task becomes




The new parameter C controls to what extent we are willing to allow points to sit within the margin band
or on the wrong side of the decision boundary. If we follow the same steps that we took for the hard
margin class we find that this change in the model has only a very small effect on the maximisation
problem. Omitting the details (see Exercise 5.8), we now need to find the maximum of the following
quadratic programming problem:




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.16 Decision boundary and support vectors for a linear SVM with a soft margin for two values of
the margin parameter C. The influence of the stray support vector has been reduced.

The only difference is an upper bound (C) on αn. The influence of each training point in our decision
function is proportional to αn. We are therefore imposing an upper bound on the influence that any one
training point can have. For the example in Figure 5.15, the support vector from the grey class had αn =
5.45. Setting C to 1 would result in a change in the decision boundary (some other αn will have to become
non-zero from the grey square class), moving it back towards the other objects in the grey square class.
This is exactly what happens, as we can see from Figure 5.16, where we plot the decision boundary and
support vectors for C = 1 and C = 0.01 (MATLAB script: svnsoft.m). As C decreases, the maximum potential
influence of each training point is eroded and so more and more of them become active in the decision
function.
  Using a soft margin gives us a free parameter (C) that needs to be fixed. As with K for KNN, we can set
this using cross-validation. The procedure and error measure are identical to those for KNN and so we
omit details here. A final practical point is the computation of b. We can no longer use any support vector
to compute it, as they will not all satisfy tn(wTxn + b) = 1. Support vectors within the margin band (or on
the wrong side) will have tn(wTxn + b) < 1. To overcome this problem, find the support vector with the
highest value of wTxn (or                    ) and compute b from Equation 5.16.




FIGURE 5.17 A binary dataset for which a linear decision boundary would not be appropriate.




                                      2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
5.3.2.6 Kernels
Our study of SVMs thus far has been restricted to linear decision boundaries. The soft margin allows
training points to reside on the wrong side of the decision boundary but this will not help if the data, like
that shown in Figure 5.17, is more complex. When we wanted a non-linear function from linear
regression, we added some terms to x and extended w. With SVMs, we take a very different approach.
The model remains the same (a linear decision boundary) but for data that has been transformed into
some new space. The transformation is done in such a way as to make the transformed data classifiable
with a linear decision boundary.
  To illustrate this idea, consider the data in Figure 5.17. The data cannot be separated by a straight line.
However, if, instead of representing each data point by xn = [xn1, xn2]T, we represented them by their
distance from the origin,                   , we could separate them with a straight line: the points in the
circle class look consistently further from the origin than those in the square class. Using zn instead of xn
in the SVM, we do not need to modify the algorithm at all. When we have a test point, xnew, we compute
znew and then classify it in the normal manner. In general, we will use ϕ(xn) to denote a transformation of
the nth training object.
  Perhaps the most important characteristic of the SVM framework is that we never actually have to
perform the transformations. In our objective and decision function, the data xn, xm, xnew appear
exclusively within inner (or dot) products:                   , etc. We never see an x on its own. After
applying the transformation, we need to calculate these inner products in the new space, ϕ(xn)Tϕ(xm). We
could explicitly transform each data point and compute the inner products in the transformed space.
However, we do not actually need to think in terms of transformations at all. Instead, if we can show that
some function k(xn, xm) = ϕ(xn)Tϕ(xm) for some transformation ϕ(⋅), we are free to use k(xn, xm) in our
expression in place of any inner product in the original space. Functions that correspond to inner
products in some space are known as kernel functions.




FIGURE 5.18 Decision boundary and support vectors for the dataset in Figure 5.17 using a Gaussian
kernel with the kernel parameter γ = 1 and C = 10.

  Our optimisation and decision function (soft margin version) rewritten to include kernel functions are




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
There are plenty of off-the-shelf kernel functions (each equivalent to an inner product after some
transformation) that we can use. The following are probably the three most popular:

                                                                                                      (5.19)




  The linear kernel is equivalent to the SVM that we have been using thus far. The Gaussian and
polynomial kernels are more flexible and both have additional parameters (γ) that must be set by the
user – normally via cross-validation.
  The results of using a Gaussian kernel for the data shown in Figure 5.17 can be seen in Figure 5.18 for γ
= 1 and C = 10 (all αn < C, so this is effectively a hard margin) (MATLAB script: svmgauss.m). The decision
boundary looks reasonable. For the original SVM, we could compute the decision boundary exactly, as it
consisted of the values of x that satisfied



We can no longer compute w as it would be given by ∑n αntnϕ(xn) not necessarily know ϕ(xn) (we only
know k(xn, xm) = ϕ(xn)Tϕ(xm)). Therefore, to draw this decision boundary, we have had to evaluate ∑n
αntnk(xn,xnew) over a grid of xnew values and then use the MATLAB contour function to draw the contour
corresponding to ∑n αntnk(xn,xnew) = 0.
  What happens if we change γ? Modifying γ changes the (implicit) transformation ϕ(xn), which will in
turn change the kind of decision boundaries we might expect to see when we view them in the original
space (remember that they will be linear in the transformed space). For the Gaussian kernel, increasing γ
has the effect of increasing the complexity of the decision boundaries in the original space. This is clear
when we compare Figures 5.19(a) and 5.19(b), where we have used γ = 0.01 and γ = 50, respectively
(MATLAB script: svmgauss.m). In Figure 5.19(a), the decision boundary is too simple – it is not able to curve
rapidly enough in the original space to surround just the data from the square class. Conversely, when γ
= 50 (Figure 5.19(b)), the decision boundary has too much flexibility, resulting in a decision boundary that
looks far too complex. In both cases, it is also worth noticing that the number of support vectors has
increased dramatically (c.f. Figure 5.18) and the solution can no longer be considered sparse.
  This model complexity problem is exactly the same as the one we encountered in Chapter 1. There we
found that increasing the polynomial order beyond a certain point resulted in poor predictions for our
Olympic 100m model. Here, models that are too simple (Figure 5.19(a)) or too complex (Figure 5.19(b))
will also produce bad predictions. In the too-simple case, it looks like the model will predict a grey square
too often and in the too-complex case, the opposite. Just as in Chapter 1, we must be careful to set γ
such that the complexity is just right using, for example, cross-validation. To make matters worse, the
parameters C and γ will affect the model in a coupled manner. We cannot optimise one and then
optimise the other; we must do both at the same time. This is particularly problematic if our training



                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
dataset is large (N is high). The SVM solves an N-dimensional optimisation problem. For large N this might
be very time consuming, and a cross-validation-based search over two parameters (C, γ) will result in
performing this optimisation many times.
  The SVM is not the only algorithm that can be kernelised. Many machine learning algorithms can be
expressed in such a way that the data only appear inside inner products. This means that, in a large
number of algorithms, we can solve complex problems (e.g. fit highly non-linear decision boundaries)
without any additional algorithmic complexity. We will see another example when we look at clustering in
the next chapter. We can also kernelise our other non-probabilistic classifier, KNN. KNN requires the
computation of distances between xnew and each xn. This distance can be expressed as




If we multiply this out, we obtain just inner products:



Replacing this with its kernelised equivalent,




FIGURE 5.19 Decision boundary and support vectors for the dataset in Figure 5.17 using a Gaussian
kernel with different values of the kernel parameter γ and C = 10.

gives us kernelised KNN.

5.3.3 Summary
In the previous sections we have described four popular classification algorithms and described how
each can be used. These four algorithms provide a solid base from which one can experiment with data
and explore the literature of other classification techniques.
  Being able to apply a particular algorithm is only part of a classification analysis. It is also crucial to be
able to reliably assess how well a particular classification is performing and that is the focus of the final
section in this chapter.


5.4 ASSESSING CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE
In the following discussion we shall assume that we are interested in assessing performance based on
the predictions for some set of N independent test examples, x1, …, xN, with known labels,       , to




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
distinguish them from the labels predicted by the classifier – t1, …, tN. These could be from a completely
independent dataset or could be the data held out in a particular cross-validation fold.


5.4.1 Accuracy – 0/1 loss
When we have needed to express a measure of performance, we have used raw classification accuracy,
also known as 0/1 loss. It is given this name, as, for a particular test point, the loss is either 0 or 1,
depending on whether the prediction is correct (              ) or incorrect (        ). When averaged over
the N objects in the test set, this quantity gives the proportion of objects for which the classifier is wrong.
This could be interpreted as an estimate of the probability that some random test point is incorrectly
classified. Clearly, the lower this value the better. Although widely used, this measure does have some
drawbacks. In particular, it is not always easy to place this quantity in context – i.e. how good is 0.2?
Consider two hypothetical binary classification problems: In the first we observe roughly the same
number of objects from each class and in the second, 80% of the objects we see come from class 1 and
20% from class 2. In the former case, an average 0/1 loss of 0.2 might represent very good performance.
In the latter, it does not: we could always classify objects as belonging to class 1 and get an average loss
of 0.2. We should therefore be very careful using 0/1 loss in applications where the classes are
imbalanced. We will now introduce an alternative that overcomes this problem.


5.4.2 Sensitivity and specificity
Imagine a binary classification task that involves detecting disease. t = 0 corresponds to a healthy patient
(x) and t = 1 diseased. If we are attempting to detect a rare disease, 0/1 loss is a bad idea – diagnosing
everyone as healthy will give us a very low 0/1 loss. Analysing two quantities known as sensitivity and
specificity is a better idea. To compute sensitivity and specificity we need to extract four summary values
from our classification results. These are the numbers of

  • True positives (TP) – the number of objects with            that are classified as tn = 1 (diseased people
    diagnosed as diseased).
  • True negatives (TN) – the number of objects with             that are classified as tn = 0 (healthy people
    diagnosed as healthy).
  • False positives (FP) – the number of objects with            that are classified as tn = 1 (healthy people
    diagnosed as diseased).
  • False negatives (FN) – the number of objects with           that are classified as tn = 0 (diseased people
    diagnosed as healthy).

Given these values, we compute sensitivity as


                                                                                                        (5.20)



and specificity as


                                                                                                        (5.21)


Both values lie between 0 and 1.




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
   Broadly speaking, these two quantities tell us how good we are at detecting diseased and healthy
people, respectively. The sensitivity is the proportion of the diseased people (T P + F N) that we correctly
classify as being diseased (T P). Specificity is the proportion of all of the healthy people (T N + F P) that we
correctly classify as being healthy (T N).
   Considering our rare disease example, if we diagnosed everyone as healthy, we would have a
specificity of 1 (very good – we diagnose all healthy people correctly), but a sensitivity of 0 (we diagnose
all unhealthy people incorrectly) which is very bad. Ideally we would like Se = Sp = 1 – perfect sensitivity
and specificity. This is unrealistic in all but the most trivial applications and we need a way to define how
optimal a pair of sensitivity/specificity values is. For example, is Sp = 0.9, Se = 0.8 better or worse than Sp =
0.8, Se = 0.9? The answer will be application dependent. In our rare disease diagnosis, we do not want to
misdiagnose any diseased people but are probably happy to tolerate diagnosing some healthy people as
diseased (they are likely to be subject to more tests and later discovered to be healthy). As such, we
might be happy to reduce Sp in order to increase Se. In other applications, we may have completely
opposite pressures.




FIGURE 5.20 ROC curves for the SVMs shown in Figures 5.19(a) and (b).

  It is often convenient to be able to combine sensitivity and specificity into a single value. This can be
achieved through evaluating the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve.


5.4.3 The area under the ROC curve
In many classification algorithms we are provided with a real-valued output that is then thresholded to
give a classification. For example, in (binary) Bayesian classification and logistic regression, we are
provided with P (Tnew = 1|xnew, X, t) – a value between 0 and 1. In the SVM, we are provided with a real
value that was then thresholded at 0 (passed through a sign function). We could use any threshold we
liked for any of these algorithms to obtain a hard classification. For example, we may decide that, if P (Tn
= 1|xn, X, t) > 0.7, then xn should belong to class 1. For the SVM we might decide to threshold at 0.2
rather than 0, making it slightly less likely that xn will be classified as belonging to class 1.
  The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve lets us examine how the performance varies as we
change this threshold. The sensitivity and specificity are calculated for a range of threshold values, and
sensitivity is plotted against the complementary specificity or false positive rate (1 − Sp), giving a curve
that will typically look like those shown in Figure 5.20 (MATLAB script: svmroc.m). These curves are for the
too-simple and too-complex models shown in Figures 5.19(a) and (b) evaluated on an independent test
set of 1000 objects. We know what we want to make Se and Sp as high as possible. Therefore, the closer
the curve gets to the top left of the plot (Se = 1, 1 − Sp = 0), the better. If the curve hits the top left corner,




                                         2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
it tells us that there is a threshold we can choose that will classify the data perfectly. The curve will always
start at Se = 0, 1 − Sp = 0, corresponding to a threshold that never classifies anything as belonging to class
1, and finish at Se = 1, 1 − Sp = 1, corresponding to a classifier that never classifies anything as belonging
to class 0 (−1 in the SVM case). As the classifier gets worse, the curve will get closer to a straight line from
(0, 0) to (1, 1). This is equivalent to randomly guessing the class.




FIGURE 5.21 ROC curve for the SVM shown in Figure 5.18. The curve is hard to see because either 1 − Sp =
0 or Se = 1 for most threshold values.

  Based on the plots in Figure 5.20, the SVM with γ = 50 gets closer to the top left corner and so is better
than the one with γ = 0.01. We can quantify this performance by computing the area under the ROC
curve (known as the AUC). A classifier that is able to perfectly classify the data will have an AUC of 1 (the
curve will go straight up the left hand side and then straight across the top), a classifier that is guessing
randomly will have an AUC of 0.5 (the curve will be approximately a straight line from (0, 0) to (1, 1), as
mentioned in the previous paragraph). The two curves in Figure 5.20 have AUCs of 0.8348 and 0.9551,
respectively. In Figure 5.21, we show the ROC curve for γ = 1 (the SVM plotted in Figure 5.18). The AUC in
this case is 0.9936 – the best of the three, as we would expect.
  The AUC is, in most applications, a better way of evaluating performance than the 0/1 loss. It takes
class imbalance into account through its use of sensitivity and specificity. One drawback is that it does
not generalise to the multiclass setting. One way of using it within a multiclass problem is to analyse the
results of the classification as several binary problems. For example, if we have three classes, we might
do three ROC analyses where each one looks at the binary problem created by considering class c
against the rest. This would provide useful information about each classifier, but it is not clear how the
three AUC values could be combined. We will now look at one final performance analysis tool that is
easily generalised to (and very useful for) multiclass classification.

TABLE 5.2 A binary confusion matrix.

                                                                                     True class
                                                                               1                    0
Predicted class                                                1               TP                   FP
                                                               0              FN                    TN


5.4.4 Confusion matrices




                                         2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
The four quantities (TP, TN, FP, FN) introduced in Section 5.2.1.6. Similarly, a large number of documents
belonging to class 19 are incorrectly classified as belonging to class 17. This analysis not only lets us
uncover where the mistakes are being made (details not available if we simply compute the 0/1 loss) but
they also provide suggestions for how to improve performance. In Section 5.2.1.6 we saw that classes 20
and 16 were very similar, as were classes 19 and 17. Perhaps it is too difficult to distinguish between
them. Class 20 appears to be the class that is misclassified most often and so if we wanted to improve
performance perhaps we should concentrate here – maybe we could collect more data or consider
combining it with another class.

TABLE 5.3 Confusion matrix for the 20-class newsgroup data.




                                      2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
5.5 DISCRIMINATIVE AND GENERATIVE CLASSIFIERS



                           2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
In our discussion, we subdivided classifiers into probabilistic and non-probabilistic approaches. Another
common way of partitioning classifiers is to split them depending on whether they are generative or
discriminative. Generative classifiers define a model for each class and then assign new objects to the
model that suits them best. On the other hand, discriminative classifiers explicitly define a decision
boundary between classes. The Bayesian classifier (Section 5.2.1) is an example of a generative classifier
and the SVM (Section 5.3.2) and logistic regression (Section 5.2.2) examples of discriminative classifiers.


5.6 CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter we have introduced four popular classification algorithms – two that provide probabilistic
outputs and two that provide hard classifications. In the space available to us, it is impossible to do them
all justice – whole books have been written on SVMs and other kernel methods alone. However, the
material presented here should be enough for the reader to be able to implement and experiment with
these algorithms. In addition, it should provide enough background knowledge about the general
problem of classification and the various types of classification algorithm that the reader can explore
other algorithms and place them into some kind of context.
   In addition to describing algorithms, we have also looked at how we might evaluate whether a classifier
is doing well and some of the problems we might come up against. Again, we have only scraped the
surface. There are many other performance measures favoured by different application areas and plenty
of other problems that we might come up against.


5.7 EXERCISES
 5.1 Assuming Σc = I for all classes, compute the posterior density p(µc|Xc) for the parameter µc of a
       Bayesian classifier where the set of training objects in class c is given by x1, …, xNc. Assume a
       Gaussian prior on p(µc).
 5.2 Using the posterior computed in the previous exercise, compute the expected likelihood:




 5.3 Compute the maximum likelihood estimates of µc and Σc for class c of a Bayesian classifier with
       Gaussian class-conditionals and a set of Nc objects belonging to class c, x1, …, xNc.

 5.4    Compute the maximum likelihood estimates of qmc for class c of a Bayesian classifier with
       multinomial class-conditionals and a set of Nc, M-dimensional objects belonging to class c, x1, …,
       xNc.

 5.5 For a Bayesian classifier with multinomial class-conditionals with M-dimensional parameters qc,
       compute the posterior Dirichlet for class c when the prior over qc is a Dirichlet with constant
       parameter α and the observations belonging to class c are the Nc observations x1, …, xNc.

 5.6




                                         2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
