Classification



In the previous chapters, we have introduced many of the main concepts that underpin machine learning
methods. We have seen how, for a particular model, we can choose parameters and make predictions
based on observed data. This has been done in three ways – finding the parameters that minimise a loss
function, finding those that maximise a likelihood function and by treating the parameters as random
variables. We will meet some of these approaches again in this and subsequent chapters as we tackle the
main algorithmic families that make up the field of machine learning: classification, clustering and
projection.
  In this chapter we will deal with classification. The field of Machine learning can boast of many
classification algorithms and this set grows on a daily basis. We have chosen to introduce just four
algorithms here. The four comprise a broad foundation to classification techniques in general and
knowledge of these will enable the reader to solve a wide range of classification problems and explore
the rest of the literature.
  The four algorithms that we cover can be split into two types – those that produce probabilistic
outputs and those that produce non-probabilistic outputs. Both types have their advantages and the
choice will always be dataset dependent.


5.1 THE GENERAL PROBLEM
Typically, we will be presented with a set of N training objects, x1, …, xN. Each is a vector with dimension
D. For each object we are also provided with a label tn that will describe which class object n belongs to.
This label will typically take an integer value. For example, if there are two classes in our data, tn = {0, 1}
or tn = {−1, 1}. More generally, if there are C classes, tn = {1, 2, …, C}. Our task is to predict the class tnew
for an unseen object xnew.
  It is worthwhile drawing parallels between this setup and the one we saw in Chapters 1 to 3. In those
chapters, we were provided with a set of objects x1, …, xN and associated real-valued labels. For many
examples, the objects were Olympic years and the labels (responses) winning times for the men’s 100 m
sprint. Our aim was to predict the winning time for future Olympic games. The classification setup is very
similar – it is just that in classification the response variable is an integer indicating a particular class
rather than a real value. In fact, we have already seen an example of a classifier in Chapter 4. The binary
response model is a well-known binary classification algorithm known as logistic regression.
   Classification algorithms have been used successfully in many domains. Two particularly challenging
examples are automatic disease diagnosis, where we are interested in predicting whether a patient is
healthy or unhealthy based on medical observations, and text classification, where we are interested in
classifying documents into topics or as relevant/irrelevant for a particular user. These two examples
illustrate the diverse applications in which classification techniques can be found. Different domains
each have their own associated problems. In the first example, how do we handle the uneven cost of
making errors? In the second, how do we handle complex data objects like text? We will address both of
these issues in later sections.




                                         2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
5.2 PROBABILISTIC CLASSIFIERS
Probabilistic and non-probabilistic classifiers differ in the type of output they produce. In the probabilistic
case, the output is the probability of a new object belonging to a particular class. Expressing the training
data in matrix and vector form (X, t), this probability for class c is As a probability it must satisfy the
following constraints:


                                                          .                                              (5.1)


At first glance, obtaining a probability as an output may seem unnecessary.




  After all, we just said that our task was to predict the class Tnew. If we are primarily interested in an
assignment, then we might choose a non-probabilistic classifier. However, in many applications, the
probability is useful, as it provides a level of confidence in the output. For example, consider a disease
diagnosis application with two classes, healthy (0) and diseased (1). Providing the probability P (Tnew =
1|xnew, X, t) is much more informative than simply stating that tnew = 1. P (Tnew = 1|xnew, X, t) = 0.6 and
P (Tnew = 1|xnew, X, t) = 0.9 both suggest that xnew should be classified as diseased, but in the former
case, the model is much less certain. Perhaps more tests are required before a decision can be made.

5.2.1 The Bayes classifier
Our first probabilistic classifier is known as the Bayes classifier, taking its name from the equation on
which it is based. Given a set of training points from C classes, our aim is to be able to compute the
predictive probabilities (Equation 5.1) for each of C potential classes. These probabilities can then form
the basis of a decision-making process (e.g. assign xnew to the class with the highest probability) or be
used to compute an expectation.
  From Bayes’ rule (see Section 2.2.7 and Chapters 3 and 4), we can obtain an expression for the
predictive probability:




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.1 Three-class classification dataset.

The marginal likelihood, p(xnew|X, t) can be expanded to a sum over the C possible classes, resulting in
the following equation that defines the Bayes classifier:


                                                                                                         (5.2)




We are left with the task of defining p(xnew|Tnew = c, X, t) and P (Tnew = c|X, t), the likelihood of xnew
belonging to the cth class and the prior probability of the cth class. We will now discuss each of these in
turn.


5.2.1.1 Likelihood – class-conditional distributions
The likelihood term in Section 5.2.1.3.


5.2.1.2 Prior class distribution
The second quantity in Equation 5.2 is P (Tnew = c|X, t). This is the probability that the object belongs to
class c conditioned on just the training data, X, t. It enables us to specify any prior beliefs in the class of
xnew before we see it. This allows us to account for uneven class sizes. For example, perhaps there is a
class c that is extremely rare. Before we see the data, we might like to bias against this class (choose P
(Tnew = c|X, t) to be very low) so that we will only classify xnew as belonging to it if it has a very high
likelihood. Alternatively, class c may be very rare but we always want to detect it – it may be crucial not to
misclassify these rare instances. In this case, we might set P (Tnew = c|X, t) to be high. This will result in
more potential xnew vectors being classified as class c. Of course, some of them will be incorrect (they
truly belong to a different class) but we will not miss many that really belong to class c. These issues can
also be resolved when we make a decision based on the set of predictive probabilities. We will discuss
these issues at length in Section 5.4.
  Regardless of our motives, the only technical restriction in the choice of p(Tnew = c|X, t) is that they are
positive and ∑c P (Tnew = c|X, t) = 1. Two popular choices are

  1. Uniform prior:                              .



                                          2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
  2. Class size prior:                            , where N is the number of objects in the training set and
     Nc is the number of objects in the training set belonging to class c.

Note that, although we have written the prior as being conditioned on X and t, it is not necessarily
dependent on them. Neither example above uses X in the prior definition and only the second example
uses t (through Nc).


5.2.1.3 Example – Gaussian class-conditionals
The data shown in Figure 5.1 has been generated from three classes. Each training object consists of a
two-dimensional attribute vector xn = [xn1, xn2]T and an associated label tn = {1, 2, 3}. Class 1 is plotted as
black circles, class 2 as white diamonds and class 3 as grey squares. Given that the attributes are real
valued, we will use Gaussian class-conditional distributions:


                                                                                                         (5.3)



where µc and Σc need to be chosen based on the training points associated with class c. We will denote
these points as Xc. This is itself a machine learning task – we have some data (Xc) and wish to infer
something about the parameters of a model. In this example we will find the parameters µc and Σc that
maximise the likelihood of the observations Xc. As an alternative, we could use a Bayesian approach. For
example, defining a prior density for these parameters, p(µc, Σc), we could compute a posterior from
Bayes’ rule:




and then compute the likelihood of xnew by taking the expectation




Assuming that the choice of prior p(µc, Σc) is conjugate with the Gaussian likelihood, the posterior and
expectation could both be obtained analytically. Performing this analysis in a Bayesian manner is likely to
be most useful when there is little data, and hence our estimates of µc and Σc are uncertain. See
Exercises 5.1 and 5.2.
  The maximum likelihood estimates for the mean and covariance of a Gaussian given a set of N data
points can be obtained by differentiating the log-likelihood with respect to each parameter, setting to
zero and solving (just as we did in Chapter 2 for the linear model). Omitting the details (see Exercise 5.3),
the maximum likelihood estimates are

                                                                                                         (5.4)




                                                                                                         (5.5)




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
where the summations are only over the data instances from the cth class. The three class-conditional
distributions are shown (along with the data) in Figure 5.2 (MATLAB script: plotcc.m).
  We are left with the task of deciding on the prior, P (Tnew = c|X, t). As mentioned earlier, a common

choice is                             , the proportion of training points in class c. In our example, there are
Nc = 30 in each class and therefore


5.2.1.4 Making predictions
Armed with the class-conditional distributions and the prior, we are able to make predictions. As a
worked example, we will compute the posterior class probabilities for xnew = [2, 0]T. We summarise the
various quantities that we need to compute and their values for xnew in Table 5.1. The final column gives
us the numerator of Equation 5.2. To convert these values into probabilities, we have to divide each
value by the sum of the three values: 0.0046 + 0.0020 + 0.0001 = 0.0067. The resulting probabilities are




from which we can see that xnew is approximately twice as likely to belong to class 1 (black circles) than
class 2 (white diamonds) and is very unlikely to belong to class 3 (grey squares).
  By evaluating the classification probabilities over a grid of many xnew values, we can draw the contours
of the classification probabilities. These can be seen in Figure 5.3 (MATLAB script: bayesclass.m). For each
class the model assigns a high probability to the area of the space populated by training points of that
class. However, there are some odd effects. Take 5.3(a) as an example: It has a high probability, > 0.9, in
the area around the middle left of the plot where most class 1 (black circles) data is located. However, it
also has a high probability in the bottom right of the plot where there is no class 1 data (or data from any
class). Similarly, the contours for class 2 (Figure 5.3(b)) give a high probability in the middle right of the
plot where there is no data belonging to class 2. These effects can be explained by noticing the steepness
of the class-conditional contours for class 3 (Figure 5.2) when compared with those for classes 1 and 2.
Its density decays so much faster than those for classes 1 and 2 that to the right of class 3, the density
functions for both classes 1 and 2 are higher. This is an unfortunate property – it does not seem sensible
to label points to the bottom right of the plots as belonging with high probability to either class 1 or 2. It
would be far better if, as in the binary response model we saw in Chapter 4, the probabilities would
become less certain as we move away from the vicinity of the data.

TABLE 5.1 Likelihood and priors for xnew = [2, 0]T for the Gaussian class-conditional Bayesian
classification example.
c     p(xnew|Tnew = c, μc, ∑c)        P(Tnew = c|X, t)          p(xnew|Tnew = c, μc, ∑c) P(Tnew = c|X, t)
1              0.0138                                                            0.0046

2              0.0061                                                            0.0020
3              0.0002                                                            0.0001




                                         2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.2 Three-class classification dataset with the density contours for the three class-conditional
distributions fitted using Equations 5.4 and 5.5.


5.2.1.5 The naive-Bayes assumption
In the previous example, we used two-dimensional Gaussians for the class-conditional distributions.
These distributions were able to capture dependencies between the two attribute variables for each
class. For example, we can see how the class-conditional distribution for class 3 was able to capture the
strong dependency that exists between x1 and x2 for the training data in class 3. Fitting a two-
Dimensional Gaussian involves choosing five parameter values: two for µ and three for Σ (Σ is symmetric
so the two off-diagonal elements must be equal). This was perfectly feasible given that we had 30
training points in each class. Problems arise when the number of dimensions starts increasing. In
general, fitting a D-dimensional Gaussian requires                        parameters (D for the mean and

               for the covariance matrix). For 10 dimensions, it is likely that 30 data points would not be
sufficient to fit the resulting 65 parameters reliably.




FIGURE 5.3 Contour plots of the classification probabilities for the Bayesian classifier with Gaussian class-
conditional distributions.




                                         2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.4 Density contours for Gaussian class-conditionals with the Naive Bayes assumption.

  A common way to partly overcome this problem (lack of data can only be completely solved by getting
more data) is to make the Naive Bayes assumption: the D-dimensional class-conditional distributions can
be factorised into a product of D univariate distributions. In other words, conditioned on a particular
class, the dimensions (e.g. x1 and x2) are independent. A univariate Gaussian requires two parameters –
µ and σ2. Therefore, fitting D of these requires 2D parameters – 45 fewer in 10 dimensions than a single
10-dimensional Gaussian. The price we pay for this decrease in number of parameters is a decrease in
model flexibility. In our Gaussian example, it means that we are restricting the shapes of the class-
conditional distributions to be aligned with the axis – they cannot model any within-class dependencies.
This is clear from Figure 5.4, where we see the density contours for the class-conditional distributions
when we make the Naive Bayes assumption:


                                                                               .


Comparing this with Figure 5.2, it is clear that the model for class 3 no longer accurately reflects the
characteristics of the data. Figure 5.5 shows the classification probability contours for the three classes
(MATLAB script: bayesclass.m). It is interesting to note that, although we know that the class-conditional
distribution for class 3 is not particularly appropriate, the classification contours are still reasonable
(notwithstanding the lack of uncertainty as we move away from the data).




FIGURE 5.5 Contour plots of the classification probabilities for the Bayesian classifier with Gaussian class-
conditional distributions and the Naive Bayes assumption.




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
5.2.1.6 Example – classifying text
Machine learning is widely used to perform automatic text classification. Learning from data makes a lot
of sense within this domain – it is not straightforward to manually build a set of rules or models that
could be used to classify text, but at the same time there is a lot of data with which a classifier could be
trained.
  The 20 newsgroups dataset is a popular benchmark dataset on which to evaluate new algorithms. It
consists of approximately 20,000 documents, each of which is a post to one of 20 newsgroups.
Considering each of these 20 newsgroups as a different class, we will build a classification system that
can automatically assign a new document to one of these 20 classes. The groups cover a diverse set of
topics including sport, computing and religion.
  The algorithms that we have introduced work with numerical data and we therefore need a way of
encoding a document as a vector of numerical values. The most common way of doing this is to use the
bag-of-words model. If the total number of unique words in all documents (the vocabulary) is M, each
document is represented as an M-dimensional vector. The vector for the nth document, xn, is made up of
the counts of the number of times each word appears. xnm is therefore the number of times word m
appears in document n.
  Given that the vocabulary is likely to be large, we will make the naive-Bayes assumption. Therefore our
class-conditional distribution can be decomposed into a product over the words in the vocabulary:




This assumption means that the number of parameters we require to define each class-conditional will
be roughy equal (depending on the choice of distribution function) to the number of words. Adding any
form of dependency between words would cause an explosion in the number of parameters that we
would have to fit. For example, if we looked at pair-wise dependencies, we would need of the order of M2
parameters. Given that a typical vocabulary might include some 50, 000 words, this is already a
significant challenge.
  The bag-of-words model also assumes that the ordering of the words is not important. For example, xn
would be identical for the following two sentences despite the fact that the second is nonsense:

                             1. The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
                             2. Dog quick lazy the jumps fox brown the over.

This assumption is not too restrictive: if our classifier is given a document that includes many instances
of the word ‘baseball’ it is likely that this document is about sport regardless of the particular ordering of
the words. Note that the bag-of-words model ignores ordering but does not necessarily imply
independence. We could still define class-conditional distributions that allowed for dependencies
between the elements of xn.
 We will use multinomials (introduced in Section 2.3.3) for the class-conditional distributions. The
multinomial distribution for the vector xn is defined as


                                                                                                        (5.6)




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
where                       and q = [q1, …, qM ]T are a set of parameters, each of which is a probability
              . Note that the multinomial distribution automatically makes the Naive Bayes assumption
through the product over m.
  There will be one multinomial (and hence one q) for each class. Therefore, we need to determine the
value of qc (the vector of probabilities for the cth class) based on the set of training objects – xn –
corresponding to class c. We can do this with maximum likelihood (see Exercise 5.4), resulting in




where the summations over n just include objects from class C. Defining the prior distribution
                         , we could make predictions using Equation 5.2. However, before we do that,
there is a problem that needs to be addressed.


5.2.1.7 Smoothing
It is quite feasible that a particular word (say m) will never appear in documents from one class (say c) –
not many religious newsgroup posts are likely to mention ‘baseball’. This will result in qcm = 0. Look back

at Equation 5.6 – if any one or more qcm is zero with non-zero xnm, the product                will be zero.
In other words, if we are trying to compute the classification probability for a new document xnew that
happens to include word m, the likelihood (p(xnew|Tnew = c, qc)) will equal zero and hence P (Tnew =
c|xnew, X, t) = 0. A document including a word that doesn’t appear in any of the training documents will
have probability 0 of belonging to all classes. This is another example of over-fitting to the training data
and we can overcome this by placing a prior density on q that encodes the belief that all probabilities are
greater than 0. Once we have defined this prior, we can set q with the MAP estimate (see Chapter 4)
rather than the maximum likelihood estimate. We could also take expectations with respect to the
posterior density of q (see Exercises 5.5 and 5.6).
  A suitable prior density for a vector of probabilities is the Dirichlet density, defined as


                                                                                                      (5.7)
                                                                   .



  We will simplify this further by assuming that αm = α – i.e. the parameter used to define the Dirichlet is
the same for each word. The MAP estimate can be obtained by maximising the prior multiplied by the
multinomial likelihood (or the log of this product). Omitting the details here (see Exercise 5.7), the MAP
estimate for qcm is

                                                                                                      (5.8)
                                                               .


Once again, summations are only over the training objects from class c. For α > 1, qcm > 0 and the issue
of zeros is no longer a problem. This technique is often referred to as smoothing – if we keep increasing
α, each word probability qcm will get closer and closer to     . This could also be considered as another
example of regularisation (see Section 1.6).




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
  The newsgroup data has been split into training and test sets holding ≈ 11, 000 and ≈ 7, 000
documents, respectively. Setting α = 2, using Equation 5.8 to determine qc and setting the prior
classification probability to 1/20 (a uniform prior over the 20 classes), we can compute the classification
probabilities using Equation 5.2 where p(xnew|tnew = c, X, t) is given by Equation 5.6, with xn substituted
for xnew.
  For each of the ≈ 7, 000 xnew vectors, we have a set of 20 probabilities. The simplest way to evaluate
how well the classifier is working is to assign each xnew to the class for which it has the highest
probability and compare these assignments to the known labels. If we do this, we find that the classifier
is correct 78% of the time – not bad given that we have used the simplest possible model and have not
attempted to optimise it in any way.
   Figure 5.6 provides a graphical representation of the classification probabilities for the ≈ 7, 000 test
points (MATLAB script: newspred.m). Each row corresponds to a single test point and the rows are ordered
by true class. Each column corresponds to a predicted class. For example, the values in column 10 give
the probabilities of test points being classified as belonging to class 10. The block-like structure present
tells us that the algorithm is doing reasonably well – the probabilities are high where they ought to be. A
plot like this also allows us to see whether there is any pattern in the errors being made. For example, it
seems that a large number of test points belonging to class 19 (the penultimate block) are wrongly
classified as belonging to class 17. These two classes are from the newsgroups talk.politics.guns and
talk.politics.misc and so it is not surprising that there might be some confusion here – many popular words
will be shared by the two classes. Another example is the confusion between classes 20 and 16 for data
points whose true class is 20. These two are from talk.religion.misc and soc.religion.christian, which are also
clearly related. An analysis of the types of mistakes being made by classification algorithms will often
enable us to improve performance. In this example, it may be sensible to consider whether classes 16
and 20 should be amalgamated into a larger class. If not, it might suggest that we should attempt to
obtain more data (documents) from these two classes.




FIGURE 5.6 Graphical representation of the predictive probabilities for the Bayesian classifier on the 20
newsgroups data. Each row corresponds to one test point and the test points are ordered by true class.
The whiter the colour, the higher the probability.




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
  There are several ways to analyse the results being produced by a classification algorithm. We will look
at these in more detail later in this chapter (Section 5.4). In the meantime, we will move onto our second
probabilistic classifier.


5.2.2 Logistic regression
Although we called it a binary response model, Chapter 4 was entirely devoted to a binary classifier
known as logistic regression. In Chapter 4 we didn’t really discuss it from the viewpoint of classification
but as a model for which analytical Bayesian inference was not possible. However, everything that one
would need to use this method is there in Chapter 4 and we will not reproduce it here. There are,
however, a couple of points that are worth discussing – the motivation for what we called the ‘squashing
function’ and generalisations to this type of model.

5.2.2.1 Motivation
In Chapter 4 we motivated the logistic likelihood,




by arguing that we wanted to use our familiar linear model (wTx) but needed to transform it so that the
output was a probability (0 ≤ P (Tnew = 1|xnew, w) ≤ 1).
  Whilst there is nothing wrong with this as a motivation, the use of the logistic likelihood is usually more
formally derived as a result of modelling the log-odds ratio. This is the log of the ratio between P (Tnew =
1|xnew, w) and P (Tnew = 0|xnew, w):


                                                                 .


There are no constraints on this value – it can take any real value. If P (Tnew = 1|xnew, w) ≪ P (Tnew =
0|xnew, w), the log ratio will take on a large negative value, and, if P (Tnew = 1|xnew, w) ≫ P (Tnew =
0|xnew, w) it will take a large positive one. Therefore, this quantity is a sensible candidate for modelling
with our familiar linear model:


                                                                 .                                     (5.9)



With a bit of rearranging, and noting that

                                                                                  .

we can obtain an expression for P (Tnew = 1|xnew, w):




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
  By using the logistic likelihood for P (Tnew = 1|xnew, w), we are actually modelling the log-odds ratio
with a linear model. In the statistics community, approaches like this are known as generalised linear
models – linear models that are passed through some transformation to model the quantity of interest.

5.2.2.2 Non-linear decision functions
The decision boundaries for individual w values in Chapter 4 were all straight lines. The probability
contours obtained with the Laplace approximation and the Metropolis–Hastings algorithm were curved
as the result of averaging over many straight lines. By expanding xn to include terms like  , we can
obtain non-linear decision boundaries in logistic regression in a manner similar to the way we obtained
non-linear regression functions in Chapter 1. For example, the data in Figure 5.7(a) shows a binary
classification dataset that may require a non-linear decision boundary. Using x1 and x2 to denote the
individual attributes (x = [x1, x2]T), we could use the following model for the log-odds ratio:


                                                                                    .               (5.10)


To show that this is able to produce non-linear decision boundaries, we find the MAP estimate     of the
parameters assuming a Gaussian prior                             (see Section 4.3). We could, of course,
submit this model to the more Bayesian treatments introduced in Chapter 4 if desired.
  Plugging    into the logistic likelihood allows us to compute the classification probabilities:




Evaluating this over a grid of xnew values enables us to plot contours of the probability of belonging to
class 1 over the space of attributes. The non-linear decision boundary can be seen in Figure 5.7(b) (the
training points have been greyed out a little to make the contours easier to see) (MATLAB script:
nonlinlogreg.m). This is an appealing property of logistic regression but it is important to remember that
the problems of over-fitting and poor generalisation we saw when making the linear model more and
more complex in Chapter 1 are just as troublesome in the classification domain. Remember that this is
for a single value of w: we obtained non-linear decision boundaries in the Laplace and Metropolis–
Hastings cases in Chapter 4, but only by averaging over many different straight lines.




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.7 Binary data and classification probability contours for the logistic regression model described
by Equation 5.10.


5.2.2.3 Non-parametric models – the Gaussian process
Throughout this book, we have restricted ourselves to models of the form wTx. This model has a set of
parameters w in which it is linear. For any particular expansion of x (e.g. adding squared terms), this
function belongs to a particular family of functions. For example, if we had squared terms, it is a member
of the quadratic family. The choice of a family places restrictions on the flexibility of the function – if we
choose w0 + w1x, we can only model things with straight lines. If we choose w0 + w1x + w2x2 + w3x3, we
can only model things with cubic (third-order) polynomials. Models such as these are known as
parametric, as they belong to a particular parametric family and the particular function within that family
is determined by a set of parameters, w.

  It is worth briefly mentioning a very flexible alternative – non-parametric models. Rather than being
defined as a function of some parameters (e.g. f(x; w)), non-parametric models are defined in a more
general manner. For example, a popular non-parametric model is the Gaussian process (GP). In
parametric models, we place a prior distribution on the parameters w which in turn implies a prior
distribution over the output values of the function. With a GP we place the prior distribution directly onto
the output values of the function. Note that non-parametric does not mean that the GP does not have
any parameters, but that it does not assume a parametric form for the function.
  The GP is characterised by two functions – a mean function µ(x) that describes the average function
value as a function of the attribute x (x can be a scalar or a vector) and a covariance function c(xn, xm)
that defines how similar the function output at xn should be to that at xm. In practice, the mean function
is often assumed to be 0.

  For any finite set of N data points, the Gaussian process essentially becomes an N-dimensional
Gaussian distribution with mean µ = [µ(x1), …, µ(xN)]T and covariance matrix




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
Sampling a vector from this Gaussian gives a value for the output of the function at each of the N data
objects.
  GPs have become increasingly popular within machine learning due to their flexibility – a GP is not
restricted to a particular parametric family. They can be thought of as a replacement for a parametric
model in any particular algorithm. For example, we could have used a GP to model the Olympics data, or
as a replacement for wTxn in the logistic regression algorithm. We discuss GPs more thoroughly in
Chapter 8.


5.3 NON-PROBABILISTIC CLASSIFIERS
We now turn our attention to non-probabilistic classifiers. Rather than providing a probability of class
membership, P (Tnew = c|xnew, x, t), their output is an assignment of an object to a class, tnew = c. We will
look at two different algorithms – K-nearest neighbours and the Support Vector Machine. Both are very
popular within machine learning due to their excellent empirical performance. The Support Vector
Machine will also provide us with an introduction to the area of kernel methods.

5.3.1 K-nearest neighbours
Our first approach, K-nearest neighbours (KNN), is very popular due to simplicity and excellent empirical
performance. It can handle both binary and multiclass data and makes no assumptions about the
parametric form of the decision boundary. KNN does not have a training phase and is best described
through the simple process used to classify new objects, xnew.
  Consider our normal scenario – we have N training objects, each of which is represented by a set of
attributes xn and a label tn. To classify xnew with KNN, we first find the K training points that are closest
to xnew. tnew is then set to be the majority class amongst these neighbours. This is illustrated in Figure
5.8. The training data consists of data points belonging to one of two classes (grey circles and white
squares). Two test points are indicated by black diamonds, and in both cases, the dotted circles enclose
their K = 3 nearest neighbours. The neighbours of test point A include two from the square class and one
from the circle class, and so it will be classified as belonging to the square class. All of the neighbours of
test point B belong to the circle class, to which B is therefore assigned.




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.8 Cartoon depicting the operation of KNN (K = 3). Circles and squares denote the training points
and diamonds the test points. Test point A will be assigned to the ‘square’ class and B to the circles.

  One drawback of the K-nearest neighbours approach is the issue of ties – two or more classes having
an equal number of votes. For example, if K = 8 in Figure 5.8, we will always have four neighbours
belonging to each class and no majority. One option is to assign the class randomly from the set of tied
classes. This may not always be sensible, as it means that the same xnew may be assigned to different
classes if it is tested more than once. For binary classification, a neater solution is to always use an odd
number of neighbours. More generally, we can weight the votes according to distance such that the
votes from closer points have greater influence making ties highly unlikely.
  In Figure 5.8 we have used Euclidean distance to determine which points are neighbours of the test
point. However, we are free to choose any distance measure we like. KNN is therefore very flexible – it
can be used for any data type for which we can define a distance between two objects. Examples of
other data types for which KNN has been used successfully include strings, graphs and images.

5.3.1.1 Choosing K
Once we have some data and have chosen a suitable distance measure, the only thing that remains is
the choice of K. If K is too small, our classification can be heavily influenced by noise. This is
demonstrated in Figure 5.9(a) (MATLAB script: knnexample.m) where we have plotted the decision
boundary (consisting of points equidistant from a single neighbour in each class) for some binary data
with K = 1. Whilst the majority of the boundary looks reasonable, there are three ‘islands’ that look like
the result of over-fitting. Each island guards a large area of input space on what looks like the wrong side
of the decision boundary. The three points in the centre of the islands are likely to be noise (i.e.
mislabeled points). This problem is easily rectified by increasing K. Figure 5.9(b) shows the same data
along with the K = 5 decision boundary. The inclusion of more neighbours has had the effect of
regularising the boundary, removing the three islands.




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.9 Binary classification dataset and decision boundaries for K = 1 and K = 5.




FIGURE 5.10 Second binary classification dataset and decision boundaries for K = 5 and K = 39.

  We have seen that a very small value of K can be dangerous. What happens if K gets too big? As we
increase K, we are using neighbours from further away from xnew. Up to a point, this is useful. It has a
regularising effect that reduces the chance of over-fitting. However, if we go too far, we will lose the true
patterns in the data that we are attempting to model. Consider this extreme example: in some
hypothetical training data there are N0 = 50 and N1 = 10 points from classes 0 and 1, respectively. Given
that N1 = 10, no test point can have more than 10 neighbours belonging to class 1. Therefore, if K ≥ 21,
xnew can never be classified as belonging to class 1 – we have smoothed to such an extent that
everywhere belongs to class 0! A less extreme example can be seen in Figures 5.10(a) and 5.10(b), where
we show a dataset that has 50 points in class 0 (white circles) and only 20 points in class 1 (grey squares).
The K = 5 decision boundary in Figure 5.10(a) looks reasonable whilst the K = 39 boundary in Figure
5.10(b) is being pushed up into the top right corner as the larger class exerts its influence.




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
FIGURE 5.11 Using cross-validation to find the best value of K. Ten-fold cross-validation was used and the
reported error is averaged both over the folds and over 100 different partitions of the data into folds.

  Datasets with uneven numbers of objects in each class are known as imbalanced and are common in
machine learning and something we must be aware of when we undertake any classification analysis. We
will discuss this particular problem in more detail in Section 5.4.
  The most popular method for choosing K is cross-validation (see Section 5.2.1.6 – the proportion of
times the classifier makes a mistake. Figure 5.11(b) shows how the percentage error (0/1 loss) changes as
K increases for the synthetic data given in Figure 5.11(a) (MATLAB script: knncv.m). Ten-fold cross-
validation was used and, to remove the effect of any particular partitioning of the data into the ten folds,
the entire process was repeated 100 times. The errors plotted are therefore an average of 10 × 100 =
1000 fold errors. As K increases, the classification error drops to a minimum corresponding to K = 5 and
then starts increasing (with a little bump at K = 17).




FIGURE 5.12 The classification margin γ, defined as the perpendicular distance from the decision
boundary to the closest points on either side.


5.3.2 Support vector machines and other kernel methods
Our second non-probabilistic classifier is the Support Vector Machine (SVM). SVMs are binary classifiers
(although multiclass extensions have been proposed) and have been used successfully across a wide



                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
range of machine learning applications. Their success is due to their excellent empirical performance and
for many applications they are hard to beat. They have been found to be particularly useful in
applications where the number of attributes is much larger than the number of training objects. This is
because the number of parameters that must be set for the SVM is related to the number of training
objects and not the number of attributes.
  The standard SVM uses a linear decision boundary, given by wTxnew + b, to classify new data objects.
Objects lying on one side of the line are put into class tnew = 1 and objects on the other side into tnew =
−1 (note that the class labels are {1, −1} rather than {0, 1}).
  The SVM decision function for a test point xnew is therefore given as


                                                           .                                           (5.11)


The learning task involves choosing the values of w and b based on the training data. This is achieved by
finding the parameters that maximise a quantity called the margin. This is much the same way that we
minimised the loss in Chapter 1, maximised the likelihood in Chapter 2 and found the MAP solution in
Chapter 3.


5.3.2.1 The margin
The margin is defined as the perpendicular distance from the decision boundary to the closest points on
either side. This is illustrated in Figure 5.12, where the margin is denoted by γ.




FIGURE 5.13 Illustrating the steps taken to compute the margin, γ. 2γ is equal to the component of the
vector x1 − x2 in the direction perpendicular to the boundary.

  The toy examples in Figures 5.12(a) and 5.12(b) demonstrate why the margin is a sensible quantity to
maximise. Intuitively, the boundary corresponding to the larger margin (Figure 5.12(a)) looks more
sensible. In particular, the decision boundary in Figure 5.12(b) will classify points towards the top left and
bottom right as belonging to the white and black classes, respectively whereas common sense would
suggest the opposite. Notice how in Figure 5.12(b) the margin is computed as the distance between the
decision boundary and a different set of training points than in Figure 5.12(a). The margin is defined as
the distance between the boundary and the closest points, the set of which will change as the boundary
does.

5.3.2.2 Maximising the margin




                                        2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
It is easiest to compute the margin using one point from each class. Figure 5.13 shows how this is done.
x1 and x2 are the closest points from the two classes. 2γ (i.e. double the boundary) is equal to the
component of the vector joining x1 and x2 in the direction perpendicular to the boundary.
  The vector joining x1 and x2 is given by x1 − x2 and the direction perpendicular to the decision
boundary is given by w/||w||. The inner product between these two quantities gives us the quantity
that we require:

                                                                  .


  Our decision function, tnew = sign(wTxnew+b), is invariant to scaling its argument by a positive constant.
This means that we can multiply wTxnew + b by a positive constant λ and the output of the sign function
will be unchanged. Therefore, we can decide to fix the scaling of w and b such that wTx + b = ±1 for the
closest points




                                       2253308 - Taylor and Francis ©
